.TH "flowgrindd" "1" "March 2014" "" "Flowgrind Manual"

.SH "NAME"
flowgrindd \- advanced TCP traffic generator for Linux, FreeBSD, and Mac OS X

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
flowgrindd [\fIOPTION\fR]...

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBflowgrindd\fR is the daemon for the advanced TCP traffic generator
\fBflowgrind\fR(1). Using the \fBflowgrind\fR(1) controller, distributed
network performance measurement tests can be set up between an arbitrary number
of hosts running \fBflowgrindd\fR, the flowgrind daemon.

.SH "OPTIONS"
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.
.TP
\fB\-b \fIADDR\fR
XML\-RPC server bind address. An easy way to enable support for IPv6
control\-connections is to specify the IPv6 wildcard address "::"
.TP
\fB\-c \fI#\fR
bound daemon to specific CPU. First CPU is 0
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
don't fork into background, increase debugging verbosity. Add option multiple
times to increase the verbosity
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit
.TP
\fB\-p \fI#\fR
XML\-RPC server port
.TP
\fB\-w \fIDIR\fR
target directory for dump files. Requires compiling flowgrind with libpcap
support. The daemon must be run as root
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print version information and exit

.SH "AUTHORS"
Flowgrind was original started by Daniel Schaffrath. The distributed
measurement architecture and advanced traffic generation were later on added by
Tim Kosse and Christian Samsel. Currently, flowgrind is developed and
maintained Arnd Hannemann and Alexander Zimmermann.

.SH "BUGS"
.PP
The development and maintenance of flowgrind is primarily done via github
<\fBhttps://github.com/flowgrind/flowgrind\fR>. Please report bugs via the
issue webpage <\fBhttps://github.com/flowgrind/flowgrind/issues\fR>.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBflowgrind\fR(1),
\fBflowgrind\-stop\fR(1)
