.TH "flowgrind" "1" "March 2014" "" "Flowgrind Manual"

.SH "NAME"
flowgrind \- advanced TCP traffic generator for Linux, FreeBSD, and Mac OS X

.SH "SYNOPSIS"
flowgrind [\fIOPTION\fR]...

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fBflowgrind\fR is an advanced TCP traffic generator for testing and
benchmarking Linux, FreeBSD, and Mac OS X TCP/IP stacks. In contrast to other
performance measurement tools it features a distributed architecture, where
throughput and other metrics are measured between arbitrary flowgrind server
processes, flowgrind daemon \fBflowgrindd\fR(1).
.PP
Flowgrind measures besides goodput (throughput), the application layer
interarrival time (IAT) and round-trip time (RTT), blockcount and network
transactions/s. Unlike most cross-platform testing tools, flowgrind collects
and reports the TCP metrics returned by the TCP_INFO socket option, which are
usually internal to the TCP/IP stack. On Linux and FreeBSD this includes among
others the kernel's estimation of the end-to-end RTT, the size of the TCP
congestion window (CWND) and slow start threshold (SSTHRESH).
.PP
Flowgrind has a distributed architecture. It is split into two components: the
flowgrind daemon, \fBflowgrindd\fR(1), and the \fBflowgrind\fR controller.
Using the controller, flows between any two systems running the flowgrind
daemon can be setup (third party tests). At regular intervals during the test
the controller collects and displays the measured results from the daemons. It
can run multiple flows at once with the same or different settings and
individually schedule every one. Test and control connection can optionally be
diverted to different interfaces.
.PP
The traffic generation itself is either bulk transfer, rate\-limited, or
sophisticated request/response tests. Flowgrind uses libpcap to automatically
dump traffic for qualitative analysis.

.SH "OPTIONS"
They are two important groups of options: controller options and flow options.
Like the name suggests, controller options apply globally and potentially
affect all flows, while flow\-specific options only apply to the subset of
flows selected using the \fB\-F\fR option.
.PP
Mandatory arguments to long options are mandatory for short options too.

.SS General options
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR[=\fIWHAT\fR]
display help and exit. Optional WHAT can either be 'socket' for help on socket
options or 'traffic' traffic generation help
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
print version information and exit

.SS Controller options
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-show\-colon\fR=\fITYPE\fR[,\fITYPE\fR]...
display intermediated interval report column TYPE in output.  Allowed values
for TYPE are: 'interval', 'through', 'transac', \&'iat', 'kernel' (all show per
default), and 'blocks', 'rtt', \&'delay' (optional)
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR
increase debugging verbosity. Add option multiple times to increase the
verbosity
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-dump\-prefix\fR=\fIPRE\fR
prepend prefix PRE to dump filename (default: "flowgrind\-")
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-report\-interval=\fI#\fR.\fI#\fR
reporting interval, in seconds (default: 0.05s)
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-file\fR[=\fIFILE\fR]
write output to logfile FILE (default: flowgrind\-'timestamp'.log)
.TP
\fB\-m\fR
report throughput in 2**20 bytes/s (default: 10**6 bit/s)
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-flows=\fI#\fR
number of test flows (default: 1)
.TP
\fB\-o\fR
overwrite existing log files (default: don't)
.TP
\fB\-p\fR
don't print symbolic values (like INT_MAX) instead of numbers
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
be quiet, do not log to screen (default: off)
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-tcp\-stack\fR=\fITYPE\fR
don't determine unit of source TCP stacks automatically. Force unit to TYPE,
where TYPE is 'segment' or 'byte'
.TP
\fB\-w\fR
write output to logfile (same as \fB\-\-log\-file\fR)

.SS Flow options
All flows have two endpoints, a source and a destination. The distinction
between source and destination endpoints only affects connection establishment.
When starting a flow the destination endpoint listens on a socket and the
source endpoint connects to it. For the actual test this makes no difference,
both endpoints have exactly the same capabilities. Data can be sent in either
direction and many settings can be configured individually for each endpoint.
.PP
Some of these options take the flow endpoint as argument, denoted by 'x' in the
option syntax. 'x' needs to be replaced with either 's' for the source
endpoint, 'd' for the destination endpoint or 'b' for both endpoints. To
specify different values for each endpoints, separate them by comma. For
instance \fB\-W\fR s=8192,d=4096 sets the advertised window to 8192 at the
source and 4096 at the destination.

.TP
\fB\-A \fIx\fR
use minimal response size needed for RTT calculation
.br
(same as \fB\-G\fR s=p,C,40)
.TP
\fB\-B \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR
set requested sending buffer, in bytes
.TP
\fB\-C \fIx\fR
stop flow if it is experiencing local congestion
.TP
\fB\-D \fIx\fR=\fIDSCP\fR
DSCP value for type\-of\-service (TOS) IP header byte
.TP
\fB\-E\fR
enumerate bytes in payload instead of sending zeros
.TP
\fB\-F\fR \fI#\fR[,\fI#\fR]...
flow options following this option apply only to the given flow IDs. Useful in
combination with \fB\-n\fR to set specific options for certain flows. Numbering
starts with 0, so \fB\-F\fR 1 refers to the second flow. With -1 all flow can
be refered
.TP
\fB\-G\fR \fIx\fR=(\fIq\fR|\fIp\fR|\fIg\fR):(\fIC\fR|\fIU\fR|\fIE\fR|\fIN\fR|\fIL\fR|\fIP\fR|\fIW\fR):\fI#1\fR:[\fI#2\fR]
activate stochastic traffic generation and set parameters according to the used
distribution. For additional information see section 'Traffic Generation Option'
.TP
\fB\-H\fR \fIx\fR=\fIHOST\fR[/\fICONTROL\fR[:\fIPORT\fR]]
test from/to HOST. Optional argument is the address and port for the CONTROL
connection to the same host.  An endpoint that isn't specified is assumed to be
localhost
.TP
\fB\-J \fI#\fR
use random seed # (default: read \fI/dev/urandom\fR)
.TP
\fB\-I\fR
enable one\-way delay calculation (no clock synchronization)
.TP
\fB\-L\fR
call connect() on test socket immediately before starting to send data (late
connect). If not specified the test connection is established in the
preparation phase before the test starts
.TP
\fB\-M\fR \fIx\fR
dump traffic using libpcap. \fBflowgrindd\fR(1) must be run as root
.TP
\fB\-N\fR
shutdown() each socket direction after test flow
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=\fIOPT\fR
set socket option OPT on test socket. For additional information see
section 'Socket Options'
.TP
\fB\-P\fR \fIx\fR
do not iterate through select() to continue sending in case block size did not
suffice to fill sending queue (pushy)
.TP
\fB\-Q\fR
summarize only, no intermediated interval reports are computed (quiet)
.TP
\fB\-R\fR \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR.\fI#\fR(\fIz\fR|\fIk\fR|\fIM\fR|\fIG\fR)(\fIb\fR|\fIB\fR)
send at specified rate per second, where: z = 2**0, k = 2**10, M = 2**20, G =
2**30, and b = bits/s (default), B = bytes/s
.TP
\fB\-S \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR
set block (message) size, in bytes (same as \fB\-G\fR s=q,C,#)
.TP
\fB\-T\fR \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR.\fI#\fR
set flow duration, in seconds (default: s=10,d=0)
.TP
\fB\-U \fI#\fR
set application buffer size, in bytes (default: 8192) truncates values if used
with stochastic traffic generation
.TP
\fB\-W \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR
set requested receiver buffer (advertised window), in bytes
.TP
\fB\-Y \fIx\fR=\fI#\fR.\fI#\fR
set initial delay before the host starts to send, in seconds

.SH "TRAFFIC GENERATION OPTION"
Via option \fB\-G\fR flowgrind supports stochastic traffic generation, which
allows to conduct besides normal bulk also advanced rate\-limited and
request\-response data transfers.
.PP
The stochastic traffic generation option \fB\-G\fR takes the flow endpoint as
argument, denoted by 'x' in the option syntax. 'x' needs to be replaced with
either 's' for the source endpoint, 'd' for the destination endpoint or 'b' for
both endpoints. However, please note that bidirectional traffic generation can
lead to unexpected results. To specify different values for each endpoints,
separate them by comma.
.HP
\fB\-G\fR \fIx\fR=(\fIq\fR|\fIp\fR|\fIg\fR):(\fIC\fR|\fIU\fR|\fIE\fR|\fIN\fR|\fIL\fR|\fIP\fR|\fIW\fR):\fI#1\fR:[\fI#2\fR]
.IP
Flow parameter:
.RS 12
.TP
.I q
request size (in bytes)
.TP
.I p
response size (in bytes)
.TP
.I g
request interpacket gap (in seconds)
.RE
.IP
Distributions:
.RS 12
.TP
.I C
constant (\fI#1\fR: value, \fI#2\fR: not used)
.TP
.I U
uniform (\fI#1\fR: min, \fI#2\fR: max)
.TP
.I E
exponential (\fI#1\fR: lamba \- lifetime, \fI#2\fR: not used)
.TP
.I N
normal (\fI#1\fR: mu \- mean value, \fI#2\fR: sigma_square \- variance)
.TP
.I L
lognormal (\fI#1\fR: zeta \- mean, \fI#2\fR: sigma \- std dev)
.TP
.I P
pareto (\fI#1\fR: k \- shape, \fI#2\fR: x_min \- scale)
.TP
.I W
weibull (\fI#1\fR: lambda \- scale, \fI#2\fR: k \- shape)
.RE
.IP
Advanced distributions like weibull are only available if flowgrind is compiled
with libgsl support.
.TP
\fB\-U \fI#\fR
specify a cap for the calculated values for request and response sizes, needed
because the advanced distributed values are unbounded, but we need to know the
buffersize (it's not needed for constant values or uniform distribution).
Values outside the bounds are recalculated until a valid result occurs but at
most 10 times (then the bound value is used)

.SH "SOCKET OPTION"
Flowgrind allows to set the following standard and non-standard socket options
via option \fB\-O\fR.
.PP
All socket options take the flow endpoint as argument, denoted by 'x' in the
option syntax. 'x' needs to be replaced with either 's' for the source
endpoint, 'd' for the destination endpoint or 'b' for both endpoints. To
specify different values for each endpoints, separate them by comma. Moreover,
it is possible to repeatedly pass the same endpoint in order to specify
multiple socket options.

.SS Standard socket options
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_CONGESTION=\fIALG\fR
set congestion control algorithm ALG on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_CORK
set TCP_CORK on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_NODELAY
disable nagle algorithm on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=SO_DEBUG
set SO_DEBUG on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=IP_MTU_DISCOVER
set IP_MTU_DISCOVER on test socket if not already enabled by
system default
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=ROUTE_RECORD
set ROUTE_RECORD on test socket
.PP

.SS Non-standard socket options
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_MTCP
set TCP_MTCP (15) on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_ELCN
set TCP_ELCN (20) on test socket
.TP
\fB\-O\fR \fIx\fR=TCP_LCD
set TCP_LCD (21) on test socket

.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP
.B flowgrind
testing localhost IPv4 TCP performance with default settings, same as flowgrind
\-H b=127.0.0.1 \-T s=10,d=0. The flowgrind daemon needs to be run on localhost
.TP
.B flowgrind \-H b=::1/127.0.0.1
same as above, but testing localhost IPv6 TCP performance with default settings
.TP
.B flowgrind \-H s=host1,d=host2
bulk TCP transfer between host1 and host2. Host1 acts as source, host2 as
destination endpoint. Both endpoints need to be run the flowgrind daemon. The
default flow options are used, with a flow duration of 10 seconds and a data
stream from host1 to host2
.TP
.B flowgrind \-H s=host1,d=host2 \-T s=0,d=10
same as the above but instead with a flow sending data for 10 seconds from
host2 to host1
.TP
.B flowgrind \-n 2 \-F 0 \-H s=192.168.0.1,d=192.168.0.69 \-F 1 \-H s=10.0.0.1,d=10.0.0.2
setup two parallel flows, first flow between 192.168.0.1 and 192.168.0.69,
second flow between 10.0.0.1 to 10.0.0.2
.TP
.B flowgrind \-p \-H s=10.0.0.100/192.168.1.100,d=10.0.0.101/192.168.1.101 \-A s
setup one flow between 10.0.0.100 and 10.0.0.101 and use 192.168.1.x IP
addresses for controll traffic. Activate minimal response for RTT calculation
.TP
.B flowgrind \-i 0.001 \-T s=1 | egrep ^S | gnuplot \-persist \-e 'plot """\-""" using 3:5 with lines title """Throughput"""'
setup one flow over loopback device and plot the data of the sender with the
help of gnuplot
.TP
.B "flowgrind \-G s=q,C,400 \-G s=p,N,2000,50 \-G s=g,U,0.005,0.01 \-U 32000"
.br
\-G s=q,C,400: use constant request size of 400 bytes
.br
\-G s=p,N,2000,50: use normal distributed response size with mean 2000 bytes and variance 50
.br
\-G s=g,U,0.005,0.01: use uniform distributed interpacket gap with min 0.005s and and max 10ms
.br
\-U 32000: truncate block sizes at 32 kbytes (needed for normal distribution)

.SH "TRAFFIC SCENARIOS"
The following examples demonstrate how flowgrind's traffic generation
capability can be used. These have been incorporated in different tests for
flowgrind and have been proven meaningful. However, as Internet traffic is
diverse, there is no guarantee that these are appropriate in every situation.

.SS Request Response Style (HTTP)
.TP
This scenario is based on the work in http://www.3gpp2.org/Public_html/specs/C.R1002-0_v1.0_041221.pdf.
.TP
.B flowgrind \-M s \-G s=q,C,350 \-G s=p,L,9055,115.17 \-U 100000
.br
.\-r 42: use random seed 42 to make measurements reproduceable
.br
\-M s: dump traffic on sender side
.br
\-G s=q,C,350:
use constant requests size 350 bytes
.br
\-G s=p,L,9055,115:
use lognormal distribution with mean 9055 and variance 115 for response size
.br
\-U 100000:
Truncate response at 100 kbytes
.PP
For this scenario we recommened to focus on RTT (lower values are better) and
Network Transactions/s as metric (higher values are better).

.SS Interactive Session (Telnet)
.TP
This scenario emulates a telnet session.
.TP
.B flowgrind \-G s=q,U,40,10000 \-G s=q,U,40,10000 \-O b=TCP_NODELAY
.br
\-G s=q,U,40,10000 \-G s=q,U,40,10000: use uniform distributed request and response size between 40B and 10kB
.br
\-O b=TCP_NODELAY: set socket options TCP_NODELAY as used by telnet applications
.PP
For this scenario RTT (lower is better) and Network Transactions/s are useful
metrics (higher is better).

.SS Rate Limited (Streaming Media)
.TP
This scenario emulates a video stream transfer with a bitrate of 800 kbit/s.
.TP
.B flowgrind \-G s=q,C,800 \-G s=g,N,0.008,0.001
Use normal distributed interpacket gap with mean 0.008 and a small variance
(0.001). In conjuction with request size 800 bytes a average bitrate of approx
800 kbit/s is achieved. The variance is added to emulate a variable bitrate
like it's used in todays video codecs.
.PP
For this scenario the IAT (lower is better) and minimal throughput (higher is
better) are interesting metrics.

.SH "OUTPUT COLUMNS"

.SS Flow/endpoint identifiers
.TP
.B #
flow endpoint, either 'S' for source or 'D' for destination
.TP
.B ID
numerical flow identifier
.TP
.BR begin " and " end
boundaries of the measurement interval in seconds. The time shown is the
elapsed time since receiving the RPC message to start the test from the daemons
point of view

.SS Application layer metrics
.TP
.B through
transmitting goodput of the flow endpoint during this measurement interval,
measured in Mbit/s (default) or MB/s (\fB\-m\fR)
.TP
.B transac
number of successfully received response blocks per second (we call it
network transactions/s)
.TP
.B requ/resp
number of request and response block sent during this measurement interval
(column disabled by default)
.TP
.B IAT
block inter-arrival time (IAT). Together with the minimum and maximum the
arithmetic mean for that specific measurement interval is displayed. If no
block is received during report interval, 'inf' is displayed.
.TP
.BR DLY " and " RTT
1\-way and 2\-way block delay respectively the block latency and the block
round-trip time (RTT). For both delays the minimum and maximum encountered
values in that measurement interval are displayed together with the arithmetic
mean. If no block, respectively block acknowledgment is arrived during that
report interval, 'inf' is displayed. Both, the 1\-way and 2\-way block delay
are disabled by default (see option \fB\-I\fR and \fB\-A\fR).

.SS Kernel metrics (TCP_INFO)
All following TCP specific metrics are obtained from the kernel through the
TCP_INFO socket option at the \fIend\fR of every report interval. The
sampling rate can be changed via option \fB\-i\fR.
.TP
.BR cwnd " (tcpi_cwnd)"
size of TCP congestion window (CWND) in number of segments (Linux) or bytes
(FreeBSD)
.TP
.BR ssth " (tcpi_snd_sshtresh)"
size of the slow-start threshold in number of segments (Linux) or bytes (FreeBSD)
.TP
.BR uack " (tcpi_unacked)"
number of currently unacknowledged segments, i.e., number of segemnts in flight
(FlightSize) (Linux only)
.TP
.BR sack " (tcpi_sacked)"
number of selectively acknowledged segments (Linux only)
.TP
.BR lost " (tcpi_lost)"
number of segments assumed lost (Linux only)
.TP
.BR retr " (tcpi_retrans)"
number of unacknowledged retransmitted segments (Linux only)
.TP
.BR tret " (tcpi_retransmits)"
number of retransmissions triggert by a retransmission timeout (RTO) (Linux only)
.TP
.BR fack " (tcpi_fackets)"
number of segments between SND.UNA and the highest selectively acknowledged
sequence number (SND.FACK) (Linux only)
.TP
.BR reor " (tcpi_reordering)"
segment reordering metric. The Linux kernel can detect and cope with reordering
without sigificat loss of performance if the distance a segment gets displaced
does not exceed the reordering metric (Linux only)
.TP
\fBrtt\fR (tcpi_rtt) and \fBrttvar\fR (tcpi_rttvar)
TCP round\-trip time and its variance given in ms
.TP
.BR rto " (tcpi_rto)"
the retransmission timeout given in ms
.TP
.BR bkof " (tcpi_backoff)"
number of RTO backoffs (Linux only)
.TP
.BR "ca state" " (tcpi_ca_state)"
internal state of the TCP congestion control state machine as implemented in the
Linux kernel. Can be one of \fIopen\fR, \fIdisorder\fR, \fIcwr\fR,
\fIrecovery\fR or \fIloss\fR (Linux only)
.RS 7
.TP
.B Open
is the normal state. It indicates that no duplicate acknowledgment (ACK) is
received and no segment is considered lost
.TP
.B Disorder
is entered upon the reception of the first consecutive duplicate ACK or selective
acknowledgment (SACK)
.TP
.B CWR
is entered when a notification from Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) is
received
.TP
.B Recovery
is entered when three duplicate ACKs or a equivalent number of SACKs are
received. In this state congestion control and loss recovery procedures like
Fast Retransmit and Fast Recovery (RFC 5861) are executed
.TP
.B Loss
is entered if the RTO expires. Again congestion control and loss recovery
procedures are executed
.RE
.TP
.BR smss " and " pmtu
sender maximum segment size and path maximum transmission unit in bytes

.SS Internal flowgrind state (only enabled in debug builds)
.TP
.B status
state of the flow inside flowgrind for diagnostic purposes. It is a tuple of
two values, the first for sending and the second for receiving. Ideally the
states of both the source and destination endpoints of a flow should be
symmetrical but since they are not synchronized they may not change at the same
time. The possible values are:
.RS 7
.TP
.B c
Direction completed sending/receiving
.TP
.B d
Waiting for initial delay
.TP
.B f
Fault state
.TP
.B l
Active state, nothing yet transmitted or received
.TP
.B n
Normal activity, some data got transmitted or received
.TP
.B o
Flow has zero duration in that direction, no data is going to be exchanged
.RE

.SH "AUTHORS"
Flowgrind was original started by Daniel Schaffrath. The distributed
measurement architecture and advanced traffic generation were later on added by
Tim Kosse and Christian Samsel. Currently, flowgrind is developed and
maintained Arnd Hannemann and Alexander Zimmermann.

.SH "BUGS"
.PP
The development and maintenance of flowgrind is primarily done via github
<\fBhttps://github.com/flowgrind/flowgrind\fR>. Please report bugs via the
issue webpage <\fBhttps://github.com/flowgrind/flowgrind/issues\fR>.

.SH "NOTES"
.PP
Output of flowgrind is \fBgnuplot\fR compatible, so you can easily plot
flowlogs flowgrind's output (aka flowlogs)

.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBflowgrindd\fR(1),
\fBflowgrind\-stop\fR(1),
\fBgnuplot\fR(1)
